---
layout: default
title: Interrupts
description: The startpoint of the workflow
---

[back](/)

# Post #3 - Interrupts

I knew that the Game Boy has a handfull or interrupts but I had never worked with them since [GBDK](https://github.com/gbdk-2020/gbdk-2020) hid all the magic behind its high level functions, time to dive into that topic!

## Where are the interrupts located?

After contacting the [Pan Docs](https://gbdev.io/pandocs/Interrupt_Sources.html) we know that the interrupt handlers are mapped to a memory location from \$0040 to \$0080 with 8 bytes per handler.
But wait... does that mean that the whole interrupt handler routine has to fit in these 8 bytes?
The answer is yes and no :D
First of all, when a specific interrupt occurs, the CPU starts executing commands at the corresponding IRQ address, so we can put there whatever we want - including Jumps or calls - and thats the whole trick.

So in order to handle an interrupt correctly, we have to do the following things:

- Tell the assembler to write out IRQ-stub at the right location
- In the stub jump/call the real IQR
- Put a ret/reti at the end of the IRQ, denpending on wheter you jumped or called it
- Enable the corresponding interrupt enable flag in the `IE` register
- Enable interrupts globally via the `ei` command

## Writing the stubs

It's always a good idea to write stubts for all interrupt handler, even if you are not going to use them:

```nasm
SECTION "irq_stub_vblank", ROM0[INT_HANDLER_VBLANK]
    reti

SECTION "irq_stub_stat", ROM0[INT_HANDLER_STAT]
    reti

SECTION "irq_stub_timer", ROM0[INT_HANDLER_TIMER]
    reti

SECTION "irq_stub_serial", ROM0[INT_HANDLER_SERIAL]
    reti

SECTION "irq_stub_joypad", ROM0[INT_HANDLER_JOYPAD]
    reti
```

From that you can implement the handler itself, for example:

```nasm
SECTION "irq_stub_vblank", ROM0[INT_HANDLER_VBLANK]
    jp IRQ_Vblank


SECTION "irq_implementations", ROM0

IRQ_Vblank:
    reti
```

or with calls:

```nasm
SECTION "irq_stub_vblank", ROM0[INT_HANDLER_VBLANK]
    call IRQ_Vblank
    reti


SECTION "irq_implementations", ROM0

IRQ_Vblank:
    ret
```

Both will work, but the second one will abviously use more CPU cycles and pushes the return address on the stack.

## Dynamic interrupt handlers

Sometimes it makes sense to swap out an interrupt handler or to simplify things a bit and write your on 'lib' which you simply give the adress of a subroutine and the next time an interrupt is triggered, this subroutine is jumped to.

In GBDK this is exactly what the Add_VBL/LCD/TIM/SIO/JOY methods to.

The first step on doing so is to store the adress of your callback method in a global variable like so:

```nasm
SECTION "irq_user_handlers", WRAM0

IRQ_User_Handler:    DW

SECTION	"code", ROM0

Callback:
    ; Some callback code ...
    ret

Main:
    ; your main code ...
    
    ld hl, (Callback)

    di

    ld a, l
    ld [IRQ_User_Handler], a
    ld a, h
    ld [IRQ_User_Handler + 1], a
```

Then, in the interrupt handler, you have to read that adress and call it.
But wait... there is actually a slight problem. On modern platforms like x86 you can do something like:

```nasm
MOV EAX, [IRQ_User_Handler]
CALL [EAX]
```

But on the Z80, there is only the generic `call ADDR` And the address part is a constant, so how do we get around that?

Well, there are actually two methods (at leas that I knwo of) to solve the issue:

**(Mis-)Using ret as a call**

A `ret` statement actually does the following: Pop the top stack element in the `PC` register and continue with the execution.
So the solution at first seems obvious, just execute

```nasm
; hl holds the callback address
push hl
ret
```

You will surely end up in the callback an everything works find, but what happens if the callback executes it's own `ret`. Well, it will again pop the top stack element and... gotcha! There is no such element, at least none that would result in a meaningful program flow.
Instead we have to push another element on the stack which will be the adress after the `ret`.
With labels thats actually pretty easy:

```nasm
    ld bc (after_ret)
    push bc
    ; hl holds the callback address
    push hl
    ret
after_ret:
```

**Using the rst command**

There is actually a special `rst` command which works like a `call` but jumps to a few specific location in the beginning of the memory instead of an arbitrary address, from there we can jump to the callback via `jp (hl)`.
This is what GBDK uses, see [srt0.s](https://github.com/gbdk-2020/gbdk-2020/blob/develop/gbdk-lib/libc/targets/z80/gg/crt0.s) and [sms_int.s](https://github.com/gbdk-2020/gbdk-2020/blob/develop/gbdk-lib/libc/targets/z80/sms_int.s).
To use this command, we need to put another stub at memory location 0x30:


```nasm
SECTION "rst_irq_user_handler", ROM0[$30]
    jp (hl)
```

And in our interrupt handler we would read the user-interrupt handler and perform the `rst`:

```nasm
; Load callback address into hl
ld a, [IRQ_User_Handler]
ld l, a
ld a, [IRQ_User_Handler + 1]
ld h, a

rst $30

```


[back](/)

[prev: Understanding the Color in Game Boy Color](/posts/p2)
